https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/palm-os-programming/1565928563/ch04s03.html

Skip to main content
O'Reilly home
SIGN IN
TRY NOW
TEAMS
For business
For government
For higher ed
INDIVIDUALS
FEATURES
All features
Courses
Certifications
Interactive learning
Live events
Answers
Insights reporting
BLOG
CONTENT SPONSORSHIP
See everything available through the O’Reilly learning platform and start a free trial. Explore now.
Palm OS Programming, 2nd Edition by Julie McKeehan, Neil Rhodes
BUY ON AMAZON BUY ON EBOOKS.COM
PRC-Tools
This tutorial shows you how to use PRC-Tools to create a simple Palm OS application. It is the second of two possible tutorials that you can read through. The PRC-Tools development environment has a great price (it’s free) and it’s well loved by many a C programmer. Just like CodeWarrior, we have made sure that you can use it in conjunction with the source code and examples in the rest of the book easily (all the code has been compiled within both environments).

Here is what this PRC-Tools tutorial describes:

What PRC-Tools includes (which tools you install and use).

How to install PRC-Tools (this includes instructions first for Windows and then for Unix). This is by far the most complicated portion of this tutorial.

How to use a sample project (OReilly Starter)—a useful starting point.

How to create a new project.

How to make a PRC file.

What PRC-Tools Includes
The most important elements are:

GNU Compiler Collection (GCC)
This compiles C/C++ code to Motorola 68K. It also functions as a linker.

Build-PRC
This builds a PRC file from the code and the resources.

GDB
This is a source-level debugger.

This next section of the tutorial deals with installing PRC-Tools on Windows. Use it, or skip ahead to the Unix section (Section 4.3.3) if you use that platform. After we cover installation for both platforms, we will deal with creating a project.

Installing on Windows
The official distribution location for PRC-Tools is http://prc-tools.sourceforge.net. Our instructions are for installing PRC-Tools 2.1, pre-3, the latest version at the time this book was written. Installing PRC-Tools on Windows requires several steps, which we’ve outlined in the following sections.

Installing Cygwin shell and utilities
Cygwin is a Unix-like shell and set of commands that runs on Windows. The PRC-Tools relies on Cygwin in order to run.

To get Cygwin, go to http://sources.redhat.com/cygwin/ and download setup.exe.

Create a directory for setup.exe (perhaps C:\CygwinInstall). This will also be a local packages directory, in which the many different packages that make up Cygwin will be downloaded.

Run setup.exe. When it asks the type of install, choose Install from Internet (see Figure 4-16). Go to the next dialog box.

The Cygwin type of install
Figure 4-16. The Cygwin type of install
When it asks the local package directory, leave it at the default setting (see Figure 4-17). This is the same directory containing setup.exe. Go to the next panel.

Specifying the local package directory
Figure 4-17. Specifying the local package directory
When it asks for the root directory, leave it at the default, or choose a different destination (see Figure 4-18). Also, specify DOS as the Default Text File Type. Go to the next dialog box.

Specifying the root directory
Figure 4-18. Specifying the root directory
When it asks about your connection, you’ll need to choose appropriate values, depending on whether you’re behind a firewall (see Figure 4-19). Go to the next dialog box.

Specifying the type of connection
Figure 4-19. Specifying the type of connection
When it asks for a download site, choose a close site (see Figure 4-20). Go to the next panel.

Choosing a site from which to download
Figure 4-20. Choosing a site from which to download
Now it is installation time. When the installer asks which packages to install (see Figure 4-21) your best bet is to just leave it alone. If you’d like a somewhat reduced install (85 MB), however, you can install just the following files:

ash

ctags

gawk

m4

pcre

vim

autoconf

cygrunsrv

gcc

make

regex

w32api

automake

cygwin

gdb

man

sed

which

bash

dejagnu

gperf

mingw

sh-utils

zlib

binutils

diff

grep

mt

tar

bison

expect

groff

ncurses

tcltk

bzip2

file

gzip

opengl

termcap

clear

fileutils

inetutils

openssh

texinfo

cpio

findutils

less

openssl

textutils

crypt

flex

login

patch

time

You can probably get by with even fewer packages, but we haven’t tested it with a smaller set. To choose not to install a package, click on the version number until it changes to Skip. Go to the next panel.

Deciding the packages to install (best choice is to install them all)
Figure 4-21. Deciding the packages to install (best choice is to install them all)
The Setup application will chug away and install everything you’ve chosen. When it’s complete, a dialog box will appear asking whether you’d like to create a desktop icon and/or add it to the Start menu (see Figure 4-22). At the very least, choose to add it to the Start menu.

Post-installation options
Figure 4-22. Post-installation options
Installing PRC-Tools
Now that Cygwin itself is installed, you have to install PRC-Tools. There are several steps to this process once again.

Create a temporary directory, called C:\PRCToolsInstall, and into it download http://prdownloads.sourceforge.net/prc-tools/prc-tools-2.0.92-cygwin.tar.gz.

Run Cygwin’s setup.exe one more time (see Figure 4-16).

Instead of specifying Install from Internet, choose Install from Local Directory.

When prompted to choose a local packages directory, select the directory into which you just downloaded the file (see Figure 4-17).

When prompted for the root directory (see Figure 4-18), specify the same thing you chose when you installed Cygwin.

When prompted for the packages to install, choose the PRC-Tools package (see Figure 4-23). You may see one garbage item with no package name; it’s OK to choose that.

Choosing the PRC-Tools package (although the name doesn’t show up)
Figure 4-23. Choosing the PRC-Tools package (although the name doesn’t show up)
Once it’s installed, you’ll get the choice to add an icon or menu item (see Figure 4-22). It’s best to choose neither.

Launch Cygwin and fix the two missing symbol links by issuing the following commands :

cd /usr/m68k-palmos/lib
ln -s libmf.a libm.a
cd /usr/m68k-palmos/include
ln -s mathf.h math.h
Installing the 4.0 SDK
Now that Cygwin and PRC-Tools are installed, you need to install the 4.0 SDK. Here are those steps:

Download the 4.0 SDK from Palm’s web site, http://www.palmos.com/dev/tech/tools/sdk40.html.

Uncompress the SDK and run the resulting Palm OS SDK 4.0 Installer.

When asked what type of installation, choose “Other Metrowerks CodeWarrior or PRC-Tools installation not listed” (see Figure 4-24).

Selecting the installation type
Figure 4-24. Selecting the installation type
When asked the setup type, choose GCC PRC-Tools Installation (see Figure 4-25).

Specifying the setup type
Figure 4-25. Specifying the setup type
The SDK will include the minimum files necessary to compile projects (headers, libraries, and updated tools). You’ll also want to have the example files and documentation. Download and decompress them into convenient locations. You will find these example files at http://www.palmos.com/dev/tech/tools/sdk40.html.

The PRC-Tools expect to find the SDK in a mountpoint called /PalmDev. Execute the following command from within Cygwin to establish the mountpoint:

mount -f "C:\PalmDev" /PalmDev
Installing PilRC
The last piece to install is PilRC. It is fairly easy, requiring only a couple of steps.

Install PilRC. The current version is 2.8. Download pilrc_w32.zip from http://www.ardiri.com/index.cfm?redir=palm&cat=pilrc.

Uncompress it and move pilrc-2.8 to C:\pilrc2.8.

Copy pilrc.exe to C:\cygwin\usr\bin.

The next section of the tutorial deals with installing PRC-Tools on Unix. If you are using Windows then you can skip ahead to instructions for installing a sample project, found in Section 4.4.

Installing on Unix
The official distribution location for PRC-Tools is http://prc-tools.sourceforge.net. Our instructions are for installing PRC-Tools 2.1, pre-3, the latest version at the time this was written.

Here are the instructions for installation.

Installing PRC-Tools
The PRC-Tools is the development environment itself.

If you are running on an x86 box with Redhat Package Manager (RPM), download the following:

http://prdownloads.sourceforge.net/prc-tools/prc-tools-2.0.92-1.i386.rpm
and install it with:

rpm -i prc-tools-2.0.92-1.i386.rpm
Otherwise, you’ll need to do a build from the source. Download, uncompress, and build from:

http://prdownloads.sourceforge.net/prc-tools/prc-tools-2.0.92.tar.gz
Installing the 4.0 SDK
The SDK contains the headers and libraries needed for Palm OS development.

Download the 4.0 SDK from http://www.palmos.com/dev/tech/tools/sdk40.html.

Put it in a temporary location. The SDK is a compressed tar file.

Uncompress the tar file with:

tar -zxf sdk40.tar.gz
Install the 4.0 SDK rpm file with:

rpm -i palmos-sdk-4.0-1.noarch.rpm
This 4.0 SDK is now installed as /opt/palmdev/sdk-4.0. If you’d like to make that the default (used if no SDK is specified), execute:

cd /opt/palmdev
ln -s sdk-4.0 sdk
Installing PilRC
PilRC is the resource compiler, the last piece needed for development.

Install PilRC. The current version is 2.8. Download pilrc_src.tgz from:

http://www.ardiri.com/palm/download.cfm?file=pilrc_src.tgz
Download it to /usr/local/src (or some other desired location).

Uncompress it with:

tar -zxf pilrc_src.tgz
The line endings for the files are DOS-style. This can cause problems for compilers. Fix it by changing the files to Unix-style line endings with this script:

cd pilrc-2.8
for fnam in *.*
do
  tr -d '\r' < $fnam > /tmp/foo
  cat /tmp/foo > $fnam
done
There’s a problem with a declaration of strdup in pilrc.c. Comment out its declaration:

//char *strdup(const char *s);
Now, you’re ready to build and make:

./configure
make pilrc
Install by copying to /usr/local/bin (or some directory of your choice):

cp pilrc /usr/local/bin
Get Palm OS Programming, 2nd Edition now with the O’Reilly learning platform.

O’Reilly members experience books, live events, courses curated by job role, and more from O’Reilly and nearly 200 top publishers.

START YOUR FREE TRIAL
ABOUT O’REILLY
Teach/write/train
Careers
Press releases
Media coverage
Community partners
Affiliate program
Submit an RFP
Diversity
O’Reilly for marketers
SUPPORT
Contact us
Newsletters
Privacy policy
  
INTERNATIONAL
Australia & New Zealand
Hong Kong & Taiwan
India
Indonesia
Japan
DOWNLOAD THE O’REILLY APP
Take O’Reilly with you and learn anywhere, anytime on your phone and tablet.

Apple app store Google play store
WATCH ON YOUR BIG SCREEN
View all O’Reilly videos, Superstream events, and Meet the Expert sessions on your home TV.

Roku Payers and TVs Amazon appstore
DO NOT SELL MY PERSONAL INFORMATION
O'Reilly home
© 2023, O’Reilly Media, Inc. All trademarks and registered trademarks appearing on oreilly.com are the property of their respective owners.

We are a participant in the Amazon Services LLC Associates Program, an affiliate advertising program designed to provide a means for us to earn fees by linking to Amazon.com and affiliated sites.

Terms of service • Privacy policy • Editorial independence

Don’t leave empty-handed
Discover how to make generative AI work for your organization in this free report.

It’s yours, free.
Get it now
Cover of What Are ChatGPT and Its Friends?
Close
Check it out now on O’Reilly
Dive in for free with a 10-day trial of the O’Reilly learning platform—then explore all the other resources our members count on to build skills and solve problems every day.

Start your free trial
Become a member now

Close